My comments this month
are drawn from 1 Corinthians 3:10:
“Let each one keep watching
how he is building.”
Building
—are we talking
about the upcoming construction
of a facility for headquarters departments
in Ramapo, New York?
Or are we referring to the building
of new Kingdom Halls in your country?
Well, as important
as those building projects are,
my comments are directed
to an even more important building work.
Let’s look at the context
at 1 Corinthians 3:5.
Apollos and Paul are mentioned by name.
And what was their specific role
identified to be?
Verse 5 says
“ministers through whom you
became believers.”
Apollos and Paul had taught
the Scriptures to many in Corinth.
In verses 6 through 9,
Paul likens this teaching activity
to the planting of a field.
Seeds of truth are planted
in the heart of a person.
By means of return visits and Bible studies,
the seeds are watered.
But if the person is receptive,
then with Jehovah’s spirit and blessing,
the truth will blossom
and grow to the point of dedication
and baptism.
Did you notice in verse 9
that Bible teachers are described
as “God’s fellow workers”?
What an awesome privilege we have
to assist Jehovah
in gathering “the precious things
of all the nations”!
So we now know the topic of these verses
in 1 Corinthians chapter 3.
It’s discussing Bible teachers
who help others to become believers.
But did you also notice that in verse 9,
Paul changes illustrations?
He said:
“You are God’s field under cultivation”
—that’s agricultural.
But then he changes the analogy,
saying “God’s building”
—that’s architectural; that’s construction.
Why the change in illustrations?
The building analogy
highlights a specific point.
You see, the illustration of the farmer
doesn’t focus on the farmer’s impact
on the growth of a plant.
In that illustration,
the farmer waters the seedling,
but it’s God that makes the plant grow.
However, the illustration of building,
or construction,
focuses on the builder’s involvement,
or the Bible teacher’s involvement.
The one constructing a building
has considerable influence
over the quality of the end product.
What kind of materials does he select?
Is he thorough in his work,
or does he cut corners
to get the job done faster
or with less effort?
Now let’s read the 10th verse
of 1 Corinthians chapter 3:
“According to the undeserved kindness of God
that was given to me,
“I laid a foundation
as a skilled master builder,
“but someone else is building on it.
“But let each one keep watching
how he is building on it.”
There in Corinth,
Paul, as a “master builder,”
had initially acquainted many with the truth.
In effect, he “laid a foundation”
for others to build on.
But what was that foundation?
Verse 11 says:
“For no one can lay any other foundation
“than what is laid,
which is Jesus Christ.”
Paul had helped establish
the congregation there in Corinth
based on the teachings of Jesus,
the foundation of the truth.
Building on that foundation,
others would become Bible teachers
and help still others
to progress toward baptism.
That is why Paul cautioned in verse 10
to “keep watching how” we build.
We can affect the outcome.
So to all of us Bible teachers,
including parents,
we ask the question,
How are we building on the foundation?
Why does it really matter?
Let’s read verses 12 and 13:
“Now if anyone builds on the foundation
“gold, silver, precious stones,
“wood, hay, or straw,
“each one’s work
will be shown for what it is,
“for the day will show it up,
“because it will be revealed
by means of fire,
“and the fire itself will prove
what sort of work each one has built.”
Do we understand how important it is
to analyze our teaching techniques?
Will we use the best techniques possible
to reach our student’s or our child’s heart?
Or do we just try to get by
with the bare essentials,
in effect, a halfhearted effort,
using hay or straw, as it were?
Some years ago in one developing country
during an economic boom,
it became a priority
to build more and more schools.
Unfortunately, building requirements
and materials
were substandard.
Well, what happened
when a 7.9-magnitude earthquake
hit one of the areas?
Many schools in the earthquake zone crumbled
while buildings around them
remained standing.
An official report indicated
that over 5,000 students died.
Think about it.
Prior to the earthquake,
schools were in session
and everything seemed fine.
Students and faculty
were coming and going on a daily basis.
But the unforeseen earthquake proved
that the building methods used
were not of the quality needed
to prevent collapse
and terrible carnage.
First Corinthians 3:13 makes clear
that how we build spiritually
when teaching Bible students
or our children
is just as important.
Now notice the sobering point
made in verses 14 and 15:
“If anyone’s work
that he has built on it remains,
“he will receive a reward;
“if anyone’s work is burned up,
he will suffer loss,
“but he himself will be saved;
yet, if so, it will be as through fire.”
The point in verse 14 is
that if we’re conscientious
and reach the hearts of our Bible students,
that may be what gives them
the needed fortitude
to withstand unexpected trials.
In that case, our diligent work “remains.”
Then verse 15 makes the point
that if our teaching techniques
were inconsistent
or were in some way slipshod,
our student
may not successfully weather a “fire,”
or stormy trial in his life.
We personally may survive,
but we might suffer the loss
of the one we studied with,
whether a Bible student
or our own child.
That’s why Paul is highlighting the need
to be the best Bible teacher
we personally can be.
However, we should mention
that if a person who progresses
to dedication and baptism
later leaves the truth,
it’s not necessarily the responsibility
of the Bible teacher.
The teacher may have been very diligent
and used
the best of spiritual building materials.
But the student or child
may not have responded from his heart.
Or possibly he allowed
human imperfection or temptation
to cause him to deviate from the way.
But the takeaway point
from 1 Corinthians chapter 3
is to do our best
to build in our students or children
fire-resistant materials.
We want them to remain
—to endure the tests
that are sure to come their way.
What might be likened
to building with inferior materials
when studying the Bible with someone?
Possibly, we initially
aroused a person’s interest
by telling him about the hope
of everlasting life in Paradise.
That’s indeed Scriptural.
But is that in itself building in such a way
that the person will survive
a fiery trial of faith in the future?
What if our teaching
consisted solely of saying,
“If you want to live forever in Paradise,
“you must study, go to the meetings,
and share in the preaching work”?
If so, we are not building
in a way to ensure
that the student or child
will resist the fire of trials
or stand the test of time.
In effect, we’re using wood, hay, or straw.
Do you remember that Paul said
we are to build “on the foundation”?
He said the foundation “is Jesus Christ.”
That is solid.
Ephesians 3:16, 17
help us to understand what it means
to build with quality materials
such as gold, silver, and precious stones.
In verse 16, it makes clear
that there’s a way
that we can “be made mighty
in the [person we] are inside.”
Let’s read verse 17:
“And that through your faith
“you may have the Christ
dwell in your hearts with love.
May you be rooted and established
on the foundation.”
How can we help our child or Bible student
become strong, or mighty, spiritually?
Interestingly, verse 17 said
that it’s by having
“the Christ dwell in your hearts,”
not just knowing Jesus in the head
but sounding
his teachings and personality down
into our student’s heart.
It means to know Jesus so well
that it’s as if he lives, or dwells,
inside of us
and motivates us as Christians.
The result?
Verse 17 concluded by saying
that the student would become
“rooted and established on the foundation.”
Yes, solidly grounded
on Jesus Christ.
And Hebrews 1:3
says that
“[Jesus] is the reflection of God’s glory
and the exact representation
of his very being.”
Jesus himself said:
“No one comes to the Father
except through me.”
So building with fire-resistant materials
means
helping the student to love Jesus, yes,
but also to have a close, loving relationship
with Jehovah God himself.
But why are we considering the theme
‘Keep Watching How You Are Building’ now?
Why is this more urgent than ever before?
It’s because all indications,
Scripturally and circumstantially,
point to Satan’s evil system of things
coming to an abrupt end.
The physical indications
of Matthew chapter 24
and the bizarre temperament described
at 2 Timothy 3:1-5
become more and more precise
as we watch “the scene of this world” unfold.
We can expect
even more opposition and persecution
from those who are opposed to our resolve
to stand on the side of Jehovah.
Our brothers in Russia and other lands
are experiencing this now.
Some have been beaten
and brutalized in other ways.
As we’ve heard,
others have been sentenced
to years in prison.
In recent years, the organization
has reminded us of what we can expect
as the great tribulation begins.
Do you remember this video clip
from the Pursue What Builds Loyalty
video series
shown at the 2016 regional convention?
Be reminded.
And your faith has led you here
as loyal servants of Jehovah,
confident that Psalm 97:10
applies to you personally:
“[Jehovah] is guarding
the lives of his loyal ones.”
Where are they?
Try the basement!
Check that door!
That video series
has been affectionately called
the basement video.
It was depicting one possible scenario
that could be considered a “fire”
according to 1 Corinthians 3:13.
The serious question
we want to ask ourselves is,
‘Would my Bible student or child
be in the basement with those other
faithful brothers and sisters?’
If not, would the reason be
because of his own lack of faith?
Or might it, at least in part, be
because we did not take
our responsibility as a teacher
seriously enough?
Did we build with fire-resistant materials
or, in effect, with hay or straw?
The same verse said:
“For the day will show it up . . .
“the fire itself will prove
what sort of work each one has built.”
It’s a sobering thought, isn’t it?
If you recall in the May 2020
JW Broadcasting® monthly program,
Brother Lett addressed the concern
a few parents have expressed
about some of our videos that depict
Biblical or modern-day situations.
In these, at times,
true worshippers are depicted
as having their faith tested
as if by fire.
The concern expressed is that some scenes
could have an effect on children
who’ve been protected
from all negative circumstances on TV,
including daily news reports of catastrophes
being faced by real people.
The basement scene we just reviewed
was one of our videos
that produced such a reaction.
Another one was the reenactment
of the Bible account
depicting Jehovah’s saving acts
in the time of King Hezekiah.
It was shown at the 2016 regional convention,
and the video is entitled
“O Jehovah, . . . I Trust in You.”
Let’s look again
at that portrayal of Jehovah’s saving acts.
My lord!
If a parent has shielded his child
from viewing all scenes on the news
or other visual images
depicting negative realities,
it’s understandable
that there may be a concern.
However, as Brother Lett stated:
‘Parents need to give their children
a realistic idea
‘of what we will face in the near future.
‘Many parents choose to help
their children appreciate
‘the graphic visual imagery
of a Bible-based account
‘while at the same time
building trust in Jehovah,
who will be with them in times of distress.’
The point is, friends,
the Bible warns us, young and old alike,
that a time of fiery testing
looms on the horizon.
We want to be realistic
and face these events
with faith and courage.
Our videos depict such circumstances
in a tasteful and sanitized way,
not showing any actual acts of bloodshed
or violence.
Be assured that the Governing Body
is not trying to scare anyone.
Instead, we are trying
to prepare everyone.
We feel responsible
to fortify the brotherhood
by using fire-resistant building materials
in the spirit of 1 Corinthians chapter 3.
As teachers of the Word of God,
may we all give prayerful thought
to the methods,
techniques, and the diligence we display
when conducting Bible studies.
We’re motivated
by the very spirit of Jehovah God.
The words at 2 Peter 3:9 come to mind.
Of Jehovah, it says:
“He does not desire anyone to be destroyed
but desires all to attain to repentance.”
May that be our resolve
as we take to heart
the inspired words of 1 Corinthians 3:10:
“Let each one keep watching
how he is building”!